content/robotics/2017/first-global.md, before:

---
title: First Global
image: https://farm3.staticflickr.com/2851/33427687130_bde9d52b36_o_d.jpg
---

After the 2017 Competition, the top 3 teams were given the opportunity to represent the UK at FIRST Global. The teams had to produce videos outlining to FIRST why they should go. My old college, `CLY` won this opportunity.

{{% youtube wXnwPsjBMv0 %}}

Whilst I had nothing directly to do with this, I still think it's really impressive!
  
## What is First Global?

> FIRST Global organizes a yearly international robotics challenge to ignite a passion for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) among the more than two billion youths across the world.

More information can be found on [their website](http://first.global). 

### The Competition
The FIRST Global competition was between 163 teams from various different countries around the world. The competition is designed not only to allow teams to compete, but also to raise awareness for STEM courses in other countries.


## Team UK

Commit message:

Add content for FIRST page

content/robotics/2017/first-global.md, after:

---
title: First Global
image: https://farm3.staticflickr.com/2851/33427687130_bde9d52b36_o_d.jpg
---

After the 2017 Competition, the top 3 teams were given the opportunity to represent the UK at FIRST Global. The teams had to produce videos outlining to FIRST why they should go. My old college, `CLY` won this opportunity.

{{% youtube wXnwPsjBMv0 %}}

Whilst I had nothing directly to do with this, I still think it's really impressive!
  
## What is First Global?

> FIRST Global organizes a yearly international robotics challenge to ignite a passion for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) among the more than two billion youths across the world.

More information can be found on [their website](http://first.global). 

### The Competition
The FIRST Global competition was between 163 teams from various different countries around the world between 16th and 18th July. The competition is designed not only to allow teams to compete, but also to raise awareness for STEM courses in other countries.

The competition itself, as well as the opening ceremony were live-streamed throughout the competition. I attempted to watch as much as possible, but timezones made that challenging! An archive of this can be found on their [events page](http://first.global/event/).

## Team UK
[Team UK](http://first.global/nations/team-united-kingdom/) finished 137th, doesn't sound great at first, but once you consider they'd never competed at FIRST, and had over a month less time to work, I think it's brilliant!

Results for all the teams are on [FIRST's website](http://first.global/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/FIRSTGlobalRankingsAfterRound6.pdf).
